International Journal of Emerging Technology and Innovative Engineering  
Volume 5, Issue 2, February  2019 (ISSN:  2394 – 6598)  
 
79 
COPYRIGHT TO IJETIE  
A SURVEY ON RECENT TRENDS IN 
DIGITAL DATA STORAGE  ON DNA  
S. SathyaBama  
Assistant Professor, Sri Krishna College of Technology, Coimbatore
                
ABSTRACT  
 DNA (deoxyribonueclicacid )  which is said 
to be the blue print of human life, is recognized as a 
powerful storage medium for storing digital 
information. The binary information of the digital 
data can be mapped to the four building nucleotides 
adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine . A very 
large data can be stored within a small of part of 
DNA.The storage is made by the process of 
encoding the digital  information to the nucleotides. 
The encoded information is synthesized to get a 
sequence. The sequence obtained is further decoded 
to retrieve the data.Using the DNA as a storage 
medium has several advantages such as 
tremendously reducing the storage space and 
preserving the data for very long time. At the same 
time it has a constraint that synthesizing a DNA is a 
very expensive process . This survey elaborates 
recent new trends adopted by several scientists of 
different institutes to store and retrieve data on DNA 
Strand.  
KEYWORDS  
DNA Sequencing, Synthesizer, Digital data  
INTRODUCTION  
Earlier days we used several traditional storage 
mediums such as papers, files etc,.  These traditional 
media  required very large storage space and 
maintenance  cost.  
 
Figure.1  DNA Strand  Later we moved on to digital storage mediums such 
as zip drives, floppies, and compact  disks and so on. 
A 31/2 floppy disk can store 1.44 mega bytes of data, 
but the smart phone era totally changed this situation 
by increasing the storage by 44,000  times .[9]-[14 ] 
Now we can store the contents of 150 smart phones 
that are 10,000 giga bytes of data within an 
extremely smaller mediumof storage DNA.  
In the living organisms the nucleotides are encoded 
upon the cells for their behaviours.  
The same way  digital information is encoded 
and mapped onto the DNA code s for storing the 
information. T he stored information can later 
retrieve by means of decoding the encoded data by 
means of some algorithms.  
TRADITIONAL STORAGE MECHANISMS  
 
Figure.2 storage mechanisms and their 
durability  
Traditional storage mechanisms include tapes, 
compact disks, floppies, magnetic tapes.  
 
 
 
 Electronic  copy available  at: https://ssrn.com /abstract =3340328  International Journal of Emerging Technology and Innovative Engineering  
Volume 5, Issue 2, February  2019 (ISSN:  2394 – 6598)  
 
80 
COPYRIGHT TO IJETIE  
DNA STRUCTURE  VS BINARY DIGITS  
 
Figure. 3 Structure of DNA Strand and its 
bonding  
The complementary partners in a DNA base pair are 
always made up of one purine and one pyrimidine, 
never two purines or two pyrimidines. Purines are 
the nucleotides that have the double -ring structures. 
Pyrimidines are the nucleotides that have the single -
ring structures. An easy way to think of it is  that the 
longer names (pyrimidines) have the smaller rings, 
and the shorter name (purines) have the bigger rings.  
 
Figure.4  Data in the form of binary digits  
Every data that is being fed into the computer system 
is stored in the form of binary values c alled 0’s and 
1’s. T hese binary values will be converted again into 
its original form by the microprocessor. This 
mechanism is explained in figure.4 .  
DNA SYNTHESIS  
A single -strand DNA sequence can be synthe sized 
chemically. The  first step of DNA replication is the 
breaking up of hydrogen bonds between the two anti 
parallel strands DNA molecule.  The separation of bonds between adenine and thymine is quite easy 
because there exist only two hydrogen bonds 
whereas the separation of guanine and cytosine is 
difficult because of its three -hydrogen  bond. With 
the help of the breaking enzyme called helicase the 
bonds are broken. The strand after the replication  
process is called replication fork.  The replication 
process takes place follow ed by the elongation 
process. The newly formed double stranded DNA 
molecule contain one old strand and a new one, 
hence it is said to be a semi conservative process. 
When the polymerase reaches the end of the strand 
the process terminates.  
 
MECHANISM OF ST ORING DIGITAL 
INFORMATION WITHIN TH E D NA 
MOLECULE  
Figure. 5 pictorially depicts the storage and retrieval 
mechanism of data in DNA strand.  The input is fed 
into the DNA Synthesizer and get stored into the 
DNA storage library. Using the PCR thermo cycler 
it gets  again retrieved by means of DNA Sequencer.  
 
Figure.5 General Method  of storing digital data 
on DNA strand.  
DNA SYNTHESIZER  
The DNA synthesizer will encode the input data.  
DNA POOL  
The pool contains a collection of DNA molecule that 
can be mapped on to the storage library.  
DNA SEQUENCER  
The DNA sequencer  will sequences  the data and 
converts them back to digital data.  
 
ENCODING MECHANISM  
The binary data is converted into a ternary data with 
the help of Huffman encoding [ 1]. This ternary data 
is further converted into nucleotide code.  
 
 Electronic  copy available  at: https://ssrn.com /abstract =3340328  International Journal of Emerging Technology and Innovative Engineering  
Volume 5, Issue 2, February  2019 (ISSN:  2394 – 6598)  
 
81 
COPYRIGHT TO IJETIE  
MICROSOFT’S REPORT 2016  
Microsoft with its researchers and scientists has 
reported a big leap forward for DNA data storage, 
DNA could be a better way to store data for the long 
term than the magnetic tape companies rely on 
today [3]. Microsoft has stored 200MB of data and 
demonstr ated that on July  7 2016.  
MICROSOFT’S REPORT 2017  
March 2, 2017,Columbia University School of 
Engineering and Applied Science has proposed an 
algorithm designed for streaming video on a cell 
phone can unlock DNA's nearly full storage 
potential by squeezing  more information into its four 
base nucleotides, say researchers [3].They 
demonstrate that this technology is also extremely 
reliable.  
MICROSOFT AND TWIST BIO - SCIENCE 
REPORT 2018  
Researchers at Microsoft in collaboration with the 
U.S Biotech Company  named Twist biotech have 
succeeded in storing 400 megabytes of data.  This 
project named “Random Access in Large scale DNA 
Storage”has overcome the disadvantage of the 
previous method pr oposed in 2016  [7]. The 
researchers and the scientists used durable synthetic 
DNA strand for data storage. The conventional 
technique in the previous research, retrieving the 
stored data in the DNA molecule requires 
sequencing the entire pool of DNA. This approach 
encoded about 35 different files of 400 MB into 13 
million strands DNA molecules and retrieves the 
files individually with zero error.  Figure 5 depicts 
the entire phase of their research.  
 
Figure. 6 phases of “Random Access in large 
scale DNA”  NEW TECHNIQUE OF WATERFORD 
RESEARCHERS 2018  
On 20th February 2018 Irish scientists at Waterford 
institute announced a new technique of storing and 
recovering data in DNA strand using bacterial 
molecules. Their survey shows that human in 2025 
the proliferat ion of data will become 160 zettabytes.  
The researchers encrypt an easy message - during 
this case "Hello World" - into the plasmids and store 
them during a strain of the E. coli  bacterium referred 
to as Novablue that's cornered during a specific 
location  that  becomes the archive storage location 
[8]. 
Another variety of E. coli  bacterium, HB101, that is 
mobile, is then discharged and travels to the 
Novablue. Once it meets it, the plasmids containing 
the information are transferred from the Novablue to 
the HB101 through an association method called 
conjugation.  
The HB101 then swims to a tool capable of 
extracting the plasmids and reading the info they 
store. The movement of the bacterium and therefore 
the conjugation is controlled and created potential 
by th e utilization and placement of 2 completely 
different antibiotics, antibacterial and antibiotic, 
among the archive storage and retrieval space.  
Novablue is immune to Achromycin, whereas 
HB101 is in a position to resist antibiotic.  
In order to complete its swim across the archive 
enclosure, the HB101 should thus initial conjugate 
with the Novablue so as to select up its resistance to 
Achromycin.  
In the method of doing this, the HB101 picks up the 
info storing plasmids from the Novablue. There are 
a unit vari ety of challenges to be overcome before 
this proof of principle may well be used habitually 
and firmly.  
CONCLUSION  
In this article we discussed various methods of 
storing digital data onto DNA. The recent 
achievements of Microsoft have  also been 
discussed. Even though DNA storage has greater 
advantages of storing data, the cost remains a 
barrier. Scientists are working on several projects 
for minimizing the cost of artificial DNA synthesis. 
 Electronic  copy available  at: https://ssrn.com /abstract =3340328  International Journal of Emerging Technology and Innovative Engineering  
Volume 5, Issue 2, February  2019 (ISSN:  2394 – 6598)  
 
82 
COPYRIGHT TO IJETIE  
In the future DNA storage will surely make a g reat 
impact on big data storage.  
REFERENCES  
[1] S. Shrivastava and R. Badlani, “Data storage in 
DNA,” International Journal of Electrical Energy, 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 119 –124, 2014. View at Publisher 
· View at Google Scholar  
[2] A DNA -Based Archival Storage System James 
Bornholm , Randolph Lopez, Douglas M. Carmean, 
Luis Ceze, Georg Seelig Karin Strauss, University 
of Wash ington Microsoft Research  
[3] ScienceDaily web portal.  
[4]Forward Error Correction for DNA Data Storage. 
Meinolf Blawat, Klaus Gaedke, Ingo Hütter, Xiao -
Ming Chen, Brian Turczyk, Samuel Inverso, 
Benjamin  W. Pruitt ,  George M. Church Technicolor 
Research & Innovation, Hannover, Germany 
Harvard Medical School, Wyss -Institute, Boston, 
US. Elsevier  
[5]Research  Journal of Pharmaceutical, Biological 
and Chemical Sciences Genetic  Code as 
Binary.UdayBhaskar, AdeeshNagpal, Himanshu 
Paul, and M Yamuna VIT  University, Vellore, 
Tamilnadu, India.  
[6]www.rte.ie/news/ireland/2018/0219/941956 -
dna -data/  
[7]Lee Organick1, Si ena Dumas Ang2 ,et.al Random 
access in large -scale DNA data storage” 2018 Nature 
America, Inc., part of Springer Nature.  
[8]www.rte.ie/news/ireland/2018/0219/941956 -
dna -data/  
[9] Rajkumar, Dr M. Newlin, M. Sruthi, and Dr V. 
Venkatesa Kumar. "IoT based smart system for 
controlling Co2 emission." Int. J. Sci. Res. Comput. 
Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol 2.2 (2017): 284.  
[10] Devi, C. Akalya, D. KarthikaRenuka, and S. 
Soundarya. "A Survey Ba sed on Human Emotion 
Identification Using Machine Learning and Deep 
Learning." Journal of Computational and 
Theoretical Nanoscience 15.5 (2018): 1662 -1665.  
[11] Raja, J. Beschi, S. Chenthur Pandian, and J. 
Pamina. "Certificate revocation mechanism in mobil e ADHOC grid architecture." Int. J. Comput. 
Sci. Trends Technol 5 (2017): 125 -130.  
[12] Raja, J. Beschi, and V. Vetriselvi. "Mobile Ad 
Hoc Grid Architecture Based On Mobility of 
Nodes." International Journal of Innovative 
Research in Computer and Communica tion 
Engineering 2 (2014): 49 -55.  
[13] Lydia, E. Laxmi, et al. "Correlating NoSQL 
Databases With a Relational Database: Performance 
and Space." International Journal of Pure and 
Applied Mathematics 118.7: 235 -244.  
[14] Raja, J. Beschi, and K. Vivek Rabinso n. "Iaas 
for Private and Public Cloud using Openstack." 
International Journal of Engineering Research 5.04 
(2016).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Electronic  copy available  at: https://ssrn.com /abstract =3340328  